---
layout: post
title: Example of Sufficient Statistic
permalink: /homework/
---

The following problem deals with the concept of finding sufficient statistics for a set of data. 

First, a quick refresher on sufficiency. For a random variable, a statistic is sufficient if it captures all information about  the parameter(s) that characterize the random variable. More formally:
> For a random vector $\textbf{X}$ with parameter $\theta$, a statistic $T$ is sufficient if the conditional distribution of $\textbf{X}$ given $T$ is free of $\theta$, meaning the conditional distribution of $\textbf{X}$ given T is completely known. 

Sufficiency is rarely needed by itself in application, but it is an important concept when constructing estimators, as it allows for a significant reduction in data.

***

From Statistical Inference, Casella and Berger, Second Edition. Problem 6.16:

  A famous example in genetic modeling (Tanner, 1996 or Dempster, Laird, and Rubin 1977) is a genetic
linkage multinomial model, where we observe the multinomial vector $(x1,x2,x3,x4)$ with cell probabilities given by $(\frac{1}{2} + \frac{\theta}{4},\frac{1}{4}(1-\theta),\frac{1}{4}(1-\theta),\frac{\theta}{4})$.  

   1.) Show that this is a curved exponential family.  
   2.) Find a sufficient statistic for $\theta$.  

Instead of solving parts 1 and 2 separately, I will cut to the chase and say that part 2 can be easily solved by proving 1. Showing the exponential family is just an exercise in algebra. Using the four cell probabilities above, the multinomial distribution can be constructed as:  
   $$ f(x|\theta) = \frac{n!}{x_1!x_2!x_3!x_4!}(\frac{1}{2}+\frac{\theta}{4})^{x_1}(\frac{1}{4}(1-\theta))^{x_2}(\frac{1}{4}(1-\theta))^{x_3}(\frac{\theta}{4})^{x_4} $$

To solve, rewrite the distribution to match the form of an exponential family:

   $ = \frac{n!}{x_1!x_2!x_3!x_4!}(\frac{1}{4})^{n}(2+\theta)^{x_1}(1-\theta)^{x_2}(1-\theta)^{x_3}\theta^{x_4} $
   $ = \frac{n!}{x_1!x_2!x_3!x_4!}(\frac{1}{4})^{n}\exp\[x_1\log (2+\theta) + x_2\log (1-\theta) + x_3\log (1-\theta) + x_4 \log \theta\] $
   $ = \frac{n!}{x_1!x_2!x_3!x_4!}(\frac{1}{4})^{n}\exp\[(n- x_1 - x_4)\log (1-\theta) + x_1\log(2+\theta) + x_4\log \theta\] $
   $ = \frac{n!}{x_1!x_2!x_3!x_4!}(\frac{1}{4})^{n}(1-\theta)^n\exp\[x_1\log (\frac{2+\theta}{1-\theta})+x_4\log (\frac{\theta}{1-\theta})\] $
