---
layout: post
title: Homework Solutions for Essentials of Stochastic Processes
permalink: /homework/essentials_stochastic_processes
---

This post includes selected solutions from submitted homework problems from Essentials of Stochastic Processes, Third Edition, by Richard Durrett.
***

## Problem 2.17:

  Suppose that the number of calls per hour to an answering service follows a Poisson process with rate 4. \\
   a.) What is the probability that fewer (i.e., $<$) than 2 calls came in the first hour? \\
   b.) Suppose that 6 calls arrive in the first hour, what is the probability there will be $<$ 2 in the second hour. \\
   c.) Suppose that the operator gets to take a break after she has answered 10 calls. How long are her average work periods? 

###### Part a)
Let $X \textasciitilde Poisson(4)$ be the number of calls per hour. Then
$$ \begin{gather*}
    P(X < 2) = P(X=0) + P(X=1)
    P(X < 2) = e^{-4}\frac{4^0}{0!} + e^{-4}\frac{4^1}{1!}
    = 5e^{-4} \approx 0.0916
\end{gather*} $$

###### Part b)

Due to the memoryless property of Poisson,

$$ \begin{gather*}
    P(X_2 < 2 | X_1 = 6) = P(X < 2) \approx 0.0916
\end{gather*} $$

###### Part c)
Mean value of Poisson($\lambda$) = $\lambda$ 
$E[X] = 4$ calls per hour, or 0.25 hours per call. 
Then 0.25 hours/call multiplied by 10 calls = 2.5 hours

---------------
## Problem 2.20:

A math professor waits at the bus stop at the Mittag-Leffler Institute in the suburbs of Stockholm, Sweden. Since he has forgotten to find out about the bus schedule, his waiting time until the next bus is uniform on (0,1). Cars drive by the bus stop at rate 6 per hour. Each will take him into town with probability 1/3. What is the probability he will end up riding the bus?

###### Solution
Let $X$ be the event of a car driving the professor into town. Knowing that cars drive by at a rate of 6 times per hour with a 1/3 probability of taking him into town, $X$ is a Poisson distribution with rate $6(1/3) = 2$.

To find the probability that the professor takes the bus, find the probability that a car does not pick up the professor. Knowing that he waits over a uniform time interval:
\begin{gather*}
    P(X = 0) = \int_{0}^{1} e^{-2t}\frac{-2^0}{0!} dt \\
    = \int_{0}^{1} e^{-2t} dt \\
    = -\frac{1}{2}e^{-2t} \bigg\rvert_{0}^{1} \\
    = -\frac{1}{2}e^{-2} + \frac{1}{2} \\
    \approx 0.4323
\end{gather*}

